In this video, we'll learn how
to access the address or location
and memory of any variable.
We'll also learn how to
initialize a pointer variable
to point to another variable.
In c++, we can use the address
operator, which is the ampersand
symbol to the left side of an operand.
The address operator is a unary
operator, and when used in an
expression, it evaluates to
the address of its operand.
Of course, the operand must have
an l value, so it can't be a
constant or an expression that
evaluates to temporary values.
In the example code, we
have a variable num which
is a simple integer variable
that's been initialized to 10.
If we display num, then
we're displaying the
contents of num which is 10.
If we display the size of num,
then we're displaying how much
storage is allocated by num.
In other words, how much
storage do we need on my
machine to store an integer.
In this case, it's 4 bytes.
Finally, if we display the
address of num using the address
operator, we get a hexadecimal
number that represents the location
in memory of the variable num.
A hexadecimal number is
just a base 16 number.
So far so good.
You can see that the address operator
evaluates to exactly what we expect,
the address of the variable num.
Now let's see these same
statements with pointer variables.
In the first line, we declare p to
be a pointer to an integer variable.
So that means that p can hold values
that are addresses of integers.
Also notice that we didn't
initialize the pointer p.
In the first output statement,
we're displaying the value of p.
The value of p is the
value that's stored in p.
Since we didn't initialize p, we
have garbage data in p and you
can see that address displayed.
In the second output statement,
we're displaying the address
of the variable p, since we're
using the address operator.
And in the third statement,
we display the size of p
using the sizeof operator.
On my machine, this displays
a 4, which means that p
is 4 bytes of storage.
Since p holds addresses, this also
means that addresses on my machine
can be stored in four bytes.
On the next line, we
assign null pointer to p.
This sets p to 0, which
means it's pointing nowhere.
Since p is a variable,
we can change its value.
This seems obvious, but it's
important since when we talk
about references in a bit, you'll
see that you can't change your
reference once it's initialized.
Finally, in the last output statement,
we display the value of p again.
And this time, we get 0
because we zeroed it out.
I know these examples seem pretty
simple, but please try them out
on your machine and be sure you
understand these fundamental concepts
since everything else builds on them.
Here you can see that I'm
defining five pointer variables
p1 through p5 and initialize
them all to null pointer.
Each pointer variable
points to a different type.
So each can hold addresses of
variables of the type they point to.
If we displayed the size of
each of these pointer variables,
what do you think would display?
Well, the size of p1 be less than
the size of p4 because p1 points to
an int and p4 to a vector object.
If you set 4 for each
pointer, you'd be right.
Based on the previous example,
all pointers in my program
will hold values that can be
represented in four bytes.
An address of an integer and
an address of a vector and the
address of a string all have
size of four on my machine.
There's a big difference between the
size of the pointer variable itself
and the size of what it points to.
Again, take your time and make sure
you understand the difference between
a pointer and what it points to.
It's very common to think of
a pointer as what it points
to and that's a mistake.
A pointer is just a simple variable.
What it points to could be simple
or a very complex structure.
When we declare pointers, as we've
done so far, they're typed pointers.
This means that we explicitly declare
the pointer variable to point to
a variable of a specific type.
In this example, we're declaring
an integer score and initializing
it to 10 and a double high temp
and initializing it to 100.7.
Then we declare score pointer
as a pointer to an integer.
So far so good.
Now we assign the address
of score to score pointer.
The compiler is fine with that
since score pointer holds addresses
of integers and scores an integer.
But look at the last
assignment statement.
In this case, we're assigning the
address of high temp to score pointer.
The compiler won't let you do
this, you'll get a compiler error.
You told the compiler that score
pointer holds addresses of integers
but you're asking it to store the
address of a double, both addresses
are four bytes long, so the issue
isn't the size won't fit, the issue
is that there's a type conflict.
In c++, we can also have
untyped void pointers.
I'm not going to talk about those
but they aren't used that much
in c++., they're more used in c.
Great, so let's review a very simple
concept but a very important concept.
Pointers are variables, so they
can change pointers can be null
and pointers can be uninitialized.
That's not usually a good
idea, but it can happen.
The example code shows
all these options.
First, we declare two double
variables, high and low
temp, and we initialize them.
Then we declare temp pointer
as a pointer to a double
and we don't initialize it.
So it's pointing anywhere.
Then we assign the address of high
temp to 10 pointer, and then we change
temp pointer to point somewhere else
by assigning the address of low temp.
Finally, with null out 10 pointer
by assigning null pointer.
We'll come back to these pointer
properties later when we compare
pointers and references, and we'll
go over some guidelines as when
to use pointers versus reference.
Let's head over to the IDE now and
go over these examples in live code.
And then in the next video, we'll
learn how to follow a pointer and get
to the data that it's pointing to.
Okay, so I'm in the CodeLite IDE,
and I'm in the section 12 workspace
in these simple pointers project.
In this project, we're just
going to go over some real simple
examples of declaring pointers,
looking at the size of pointers,
looking at addresses, just so
you get a really good feel of
about what's going on here.
First thing you'll notice here is that
we're declaring num to be an integer,
and we're initializing it to 10.
That's just a plain
old integer variable.
There's no pointer
involved here at all.
So in this case, I've got a
variable it's called num, and
it exists somewhere in memory.
Let's say it's somewhere
in memory here.
Obviously, that memory has to have a
location, right, we need an address.
So let's just say that
the address is a 1000.
I'll use a thousand in these examples.
Obviously, it won't be a
1000 when we display it.
But you'll -- it's easier
to understand this way.
So right now it's got a 10 in it
because we've initialized it, so
that's the value of num is 10.
So in this case here, i print
out the value of num is num,
which will display a 10.
Then I'll ask what's the size of num?
What is the size of an
integer on my machine?
This may be different on your
machine, but on my machine
an integer is 4 bytes.
And then at the end here, we'll
say what is the address of num?
And this is where the address
operator comes in, that ampersand
right before the variable name.
This evaluates to the
location and memory or the
address of that variable.
In this case, it would be a
1000, so it would print the 1000.
But obviously, it will print
something different when I
actually run the program.
So let's take a look at
the output from here.
Okay, so here's the output.
I'll just put this side by
side, so we can read it.
The value of num is 10 that's
exactly what we expected.
And I knew that the size of an
integer on my machine is 4, on
yours it might be 8, it might be 4.
And then the address of num is a
hexadecimal number, so this is the way
that addresses are represented in c++.
A hex number is just
a number to base 16.
So that's the address of
that integer variable.
Okay, so hopefully, this makes sense.
This is the real foundation
to understanding pointers and
is understanding locations
or addresses of variables, so
hopefully this makes sense.
So let me clear this out.
And then let's do this
next example here.
Here's where we're actually
declaring a pointer, and we're
doing that right here on line 17.
We're declaring p to be
a pointer to an integer.
Remember, you read these
from right to left.
So p is a pointer to an integer.
What is p, it's a variable.
So here's p.
It's got storage associated
with it, and it's got a
location associated with it.
Let's say that the address
of p is 2000 this time.
What's in p right now,
I never initialized it.
So there's garbage in here.
There's a random bit pattern here.
And as far as c++ is concerned,
that random bit pattern is
an address, right, because
pointers hold addresses.
So this guy, right now, is
pointing somewhere who knows where.
But it's definitely
pointing somewhere.
So what's the value of p, whatever
that bit pattern is, we're
going get garbage right here.
And you can see that the trouble
or the danger of following that
pointer and putting something in
this address here that could be
something pretty important on your
machine and you just wiped it out.
Hopefully, you'll get a
crash, and you can fix it.
Okay, so what's the address of p.
Well, the address of p is the
location where this pointer
is stored, in this case 2000.
And then what's the size of p?
How big or how much storage do I need
to represent a pointer on my machine?
Well, on my machine, it
happens to be 4 bytes.
Again, yours it could be different.
So this will print out some
garbage memory address.
Then it'll print out the address
where this variable is stored
and then it should print out a 4.
So let's give that a shot.
And here you go, I'll
move it over here as well.
The value of p is,
there's the hex address.
That's the garbage address.
Okay, then the address of p is at
this location right here ends ending
at 18, and the size of p is 4.
Now on line 22, I
nulled out the pointer.
I said p equals null pointer.
Null pointer is
basically addressed to 0.
So you're just zeroing
out the pointer.
So if I print out now the value of
p, I should get back a 0 and I do.
What we're doing here is we're
making this pointer point nowhere,
which is real, real important.
Okay, so let's do a few more examples.
In this case, I'm declaring
5 pointers, p1 through p5,
just like I did in the slides.
And all of these pointers are
pointing to different types.
Okay, so and they're all
nulled out right now.
So in the case of p1, p1 has
stored in memory obviously, right.
We need to allocate
storage for that variable.
Right now, it's null.
So it's basically pointing nowhere.
P2 is also a pointer, and
we're allocating space for it.
It's pointing nowhere.
Eventually, P1 will
point to an integer.
P2 will point to a double.
P3 will point to unsigned long long.
And p4 to a vector.
And p5 to a string.
So what they're pointing to
is very different from what.
They are they're just pointer
variables, real primitive types.
In this case, what is the size of p1?
How much storage do I need to
represent the address of an integer?
It turns out it's 4 bytes.
What's the size of p2?
How much storage do I need to
represent the address of a double?
Again, it's 4 bytes.
On my machine 4 bytes, and I can
represent any address of any variable.
So what you would expect here
is to print 4 all the way down.
Okay, now this is important.
It's really important to understand
the difference between the
pointer and what it's pointing to.
Let's say we've got p1.
Eventually, p1 is going to
point to an integer, right.
That's the whole idea.
And p2 will point to a double, so
we'll have much more storage here.
And let's say p4 is over here.
P4 will eventually point to a
vector of string objects so it
could be pointing to a vector of
string objects where this could
be Larry Moe and Curly, where
these guys are all string objects.
So you can see the
pointer itself is simple.
The pointer itself is simple.
They're all really simple.
What they point to could be very
simple or it could be pretty
complex as you see right here.
Okay, so make sure you understand
the difference between the
pointer and what it points
to, it's really critical.
So in this example, if I
run it, I expect to get
4 straight down the line.
And there you go, size of p1
is 4 all the way down the line
because all I need is 4 bytes to
represent any address on my machine.
Again, this is very machine-specific.
You might have 8 on your machine.
Okay, so now let's go through
one more little example here.
All right, so let's walk through
this before we even run it.
In this case, what have I got
I've got score as an integer,
and I'm initializing it to 10.
Okay, let's do that over here.
Here's score, it's an integer
and I put a 10 in there.
Let's assume that that
address is a 1000.
That's where score lives.
Again, it'll be different
on your machine, for sure.
I'm just making that thousand up.
Then I've got a double
called high temperature.
Obviously, I need more
storage for double, right.
And this is called high temp.
And right now i have a 100.7 in there.
And let's say that this
is an address 2000.
Okay, so those are the
addresses for those variables.
Now here's my pointer.
It's called score pointer.
It's got storage associated with it.
Right now, I've nulled it
out so it's pointing nowhere.
So far so good.
Now this is what I'm doing here.
I'm saying score pointer is
equal to the address of score.
I'm initializing that pointer
to point somewhere now.
What's the address of score?
It's right here, 1000.
So I'm going to put a 1000 in here.
I'm not putting the 10 in here.
I'm putting the 1000 in here.
That's my pointer.
So now score pointer is pointing
to an integer because it holds
the address of an integer.
So score pointer is pointing to score.
That's what we're doing right here.
So now let's display
what's the value of score?
Well, the value of score
is 10, right, right here.
So this should display a 10.
What's the address of score?
In this example, it's a 100.
And what's the value
of the score pointer?
A 1000.
And so when we run this now, we're
definitely going to get a 10 here.
And we're going to get
obviously not a 1000 here.
But what's important is that those
two numbers will be the same, they
have to be the same because score
pointer is pointing to score and
score has an address, which is
the one that's in score pointer.
Okay, so when we run this,
we're expecting, as I said,
a 10 and then two memory
addresses that are the same.
So let's give that a try.
And this is where we're at, the
value of score is 10, and then the
address of score is, we can see here
ending in F0, value score pointer F0.
So these are the exact same address,
which is exactly what we expected.
And then this last little compiler
error here, let me show you that so
that you can see the compiler and what
it looks like in case you run into it.
This is a pretty common mistake.
Actually what happens here is
we're saying score pointer, right
here, points to an integer, right.
It holds addresses of integers.
But we're trying to put in
here the address of high temp.
High temp is a double.
The compiler is going to say sorry.
I don't know what
you're talking about.
You're telling me that score
pointer holds addresses of integers.
But now you're trying to
put the address of a double
in there, I can't do that.
And let's compile this so you
can see what the error looks
like, and it makes sense, right.
It says I cannot convert a pointer to
a double to a pointer to an integer.
Okay, so that gives you some insight.
Play around with these examples,
create some of your own, walk
through them, draw like I did,
so you really understand these
connections between the pointer
variable and what it points to.